.\" Originally written by Jan Schaumann
.\" <jschauma@netmeister.org> in May 2020.
.Dd May 28, 2020
.Dt gdig 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gdig 
.Nd get a DNS response for the given geo location
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 46Vhv
.Ar country
.Ar query
.Op Ar dig-args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool lets you perform a
.Xr dig 1
lookup as if you were coming from the given
geographical location.
It does this by determining a suitable CIDR subnet via
the
.Xr gip 1
utility and then passing this via the EDNS Client Subnet
option '+subnet' argument on to
.Xr dig 1 .
In order to increase the odds that the ECS is not
ignored by any resolvers,
.Nm
will query the authoritative name server for the given
query directly.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width __
.It Fl 4
Only use IPv4 ECS cidrs.
.It Fl 6
Only use IPv6 ECS cidrs.
.It Fl V
Print version number and exit.
.It Fl h
Display help and exit.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
Can be specified multiple times.
.El
.Sh ARGUMENTS
The first required argument to
.Nm
will be passed on to
.Xr gip 1
to determine the ECS CIDR to use.
.Pp
The second required argument is the domain name to
look up and which will determine the authoritative
nameserver to query.
This argument will be passed on to
.Xr dig 1 .
.Pp
Any additional arguments will be passed on to
.Xr dig 1
as well, allowing the user to specify any other
options, if desired.
.Sh DETAILS
.Nm
takes as the first argument a
.Ar country ,
which it will pass on to the
.Xr gip 1
utility to determine a suitable CIDR subnet.
This subnet will then subsequently used as the EDNS
Client Subnet option as passed to
.Xr dig 1
for the full query provided as subsequent arguments.
.Pp
Note: if the special argument 'none' is supplied as
the
.Ar country ,
then
.Nm
will disable ECS by setting it explicitly to
\'0.0.0.0/0'.
.Pp
The part where
.Nm
provides additional meaningful help is in that it will
attempt to identify the authoritative nameservers for
the given lookup and query those nameservers directly.
.Pp
In the process,
.Nm
will first resolve any CNAMEs and then begin
identifying the responsible NS record from the
left-most side of the name.
.Pp
For example, to determine what the IPv4 address would
be that Wikipedia's NS servers would return if you
queried them from Japan, you might try to execute the
following commands:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
host -t cname www.wikipedia.org
host -t ns dyna.wikimedia.org.
host -t ns wikimedia.org.
gip -c japan
dig +subnet=185.102.64.0/22 @ns1.wikimedia.org dyna.wikimedia.org
.Ed
.Pp
.Nm
will perform roughly those steps.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The most common usage would likely look as follows:
.Pp
To send a query for 'www.wikipedia.org' as if coming
from Japan:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gdig japan www.wikipedia.org
.Ed
.Pp
To send a query for IPv6 addresses for 'www.yahoo.com'
as if coming from Germany:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gdig germany www.yahoo.com -t AAAA +short
.Ed
.Pp
To send a query for A records of 'google.com' as if coming
from the sa-east-1 region in AWS:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
gdig sa-east-1 google.com -t A +short
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std 
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dig 1 ,
.Xr gip 1
.Pp
RFC7871
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jschauma@netmeister.org
in May 2020.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests by emailing the author.
